We're talking to Mr. Peter Howard in Hadley, Massachusetts.
What is it, today's the 7th?
November, I guess.
We have a number of things to talk about, Mr. Howard, I guess.
And we've addressed a few of them on the phone.
Where can I start?
Well, I had wanted to talk to you, but Mr.
Larry McMurtry really urged me to talk to you.
And you had indicated that you had some ideas about Larry McMurtry.
Let's start generally with that.
We were onto something pretty good on the telephone.
I forget where that was.
Maybe we can just start it and take it from there.
Well, it was probably my fascination with bookselling as a career and a profession.
invested in an individual, invested in the personality of an individual, because my attraction to the profession is almost entirely based upon my perception of how it satisfies emotional needs and how people relate to other people via book.
Bill Larry is a particular example because he seems so much to be a writer, being a writer entirely aside for the moment.
He's an extreme example of someone for whom getting the books seems to be the most important aspect of book selling.
relating to the customer the least important.
Although I don't see him less and less frequently, the fact that he seems to have very little concern for the customer is interesting to me because I believe that I'm completely the opposite, although every bookseller
takes vast pleasure in chasing books down however and by whatever means.
But given the variety of premises and how people relate to their customers and whether they meet them face to face and whether they follow up with them and then whether they in fact make it a career of following up with them, lives go in different directions.
There's a vast difference in the input for booksellers.
Almost every bookseller has the same experience of seeing the same books out in the world because they're all constantly looking into their stocks.
There are very few booksellers who are of my generation, or certainly in modern literature, or who started modern literature, who only buy privately.
That's an entire difference.
You only buy privately?
No, I indeed not, although more than I used to.
It takes years to, unless you somehow determine that you're only going to buy privately, almost every bookseller starts by canvassing the rest of the book trade to one degree or another.
And the booksellers are infinitely more mobile in my generation and since then before, when there wasn't
flying all over the country, driving all over the country, telephoning all over the world, and now faxing all over the world with an infinity of book fairs to visit and to harvest or to explore.
So I would think more than ever, bookstores, instead of having a bookstore on the corner and awaiting
possibilities of acquiring books from people who might be in their own town, they are aggressively going out and finding books.
McMurtry was always a great traveler for books.
Do you think he's buying books himself?
Yes.
And the bookstore is a device, so to speak.
Well, it's very much more complicated than that.
He's always had a tremendous house full of books that reflected his given interest at a given moment, totally separate from his own store.
Stores, four of them.
Right.
And then the multiplicity of stores didn't come from the longest time.
His only...
explanation to me for his stores was that the other stores were meant to be feeder stores for, in order to buy books so they could have them to sell out of Washington.
I have a dear friend in Southern California who's the most talented book person in Southern California in need of a job, and when McMurtry mentioned once that he intended to open a bookstore in Orange County,
I proposed my friend immediately, saying that he could not possibly do better.
He was the most honest person I've ever met, and the most conscientious, and the most brilliant.
And McMurtry immediately said that he certainly didn't want anybody with any talent running the bookstore and working for him.
He wanted the opposite, and so that was the end of that conversation.
Did you probe that position?
I understood it.
He also tries to keep people at arm's length who might penetrate his privacy as a writer and as an individual, so he doesn't want people who are interested in him too near him.
which is entirely understandable.
And there could not be anybody in literature who would not be interested in McMurtry because, of course, his books are widely collected and widely read, and no one writes more intelligently about modern women than he.
So, in that regard, he simply is trying to protect himself.
What did you think of his Cadillac Jack book?
Well, I was extremely interested in Cadillac Jack.
I think it's one of his worst written books.
But I long ago came to the conclusion that the emotions of his central character, who, although a dealer not in books, evidenced a very strange collection of emotions
would emphasize the tendencies one sees in any profession such as ours, and particularly in the book profession, of the person always looking for a bargain, a score, looking to impose his knowledge in order to get from somebody who possesses a book, an object of much greater value, and then
selling it for the big profit, possibly to an unappreciative buyer.
And it was a portion of an equation that everybody gets to experience one time or another, and of course the mistake was necessarily to attribute any portion of these
ideas to McMurtry himself, but the fact was that I felt that the character in the book had no affection for his customers.
Do you think that's a reflection of Larry?
Well, I think, of course, it's a mistake to attribute that, but I didn't like the character.
Is he based on a real guy, by the way?
There are several people.
He is one of the people said to be the sorcerer, a guy like Jack is Hallam Weber.
How do we spell his name?
H-A-L-L-A-M-W-E-B-B-E-R.
Is he around?
Hallam Weber is a marvelously curious book person in Washington, D.C., who is
has been said by the former head of the Library of Congress to be the most industriously curious and library-hunting, research-hunting person he ever met with regard to material found and in need of research.
Is this guy approachable?
Oh, I think he probably is approachable.
He has always been on the periphery of the organized bull trade in that for a long time he attempted to exploit the
organized book trade without joining it, he would set up in a hotel room opposite or on top of any book fair, particularly ABAA book fairs, and then invite the dealers and the customers up to his room to buy books without participating, i.e.
paying some of the fees, and enjoying some of the responsibilities of
of the members of the ABAA, I actually had an occasion to all of us, I think, let him know how we felt about this.
And at one point, he had driven all the way across the country, had a serious accident, came to my store, and I let him look around, and then when he attempted to penetrate, every book viewer has rooms behind rooms.
and everyone knows that the good stuff is in the back.
I allowed a towel of the back was not open to the public and he couldn't come back.
It was something so rare that he knew I was treating him in an especially tall manner.
And he actually broke down and cried when I informed him of what I thought of him and why I was doing this.
What did you think of him?
What did you tell him?
Well, I told him that the manner in which he attempted to exploit the organized booksellers was...
Is that how you said it, or were you more salty than that?
I probably said it even more salty than that.
I said it probably in a two-faced gentle way.
He did really take it personally, because I enjoyed some respect for him.
And he went away, and we became much closer subsequently.
And I sold him some interesting things afterwards, and we had a much closer rapport after that.
In fact, I think he certainly stopped that practice and had changed, but he was a man subject to serious changes anyway.
He had, I believe, lost a daughter in a tragic accident as well.
He'd been ill subsequently, and I believe he's even under a serious philosophical or religious conversion taboo.
But he and Cadillac Jack had, and I'm certain that Mercury said that Cadillac Jack
had parts of Alan Webber running, there was, again, this indisputable aspect that Alan Webber was a great getter of interesting items.
Well, like Cadillac Jack, did he do other things in addition to books?
Oh, I sold him a powder horn.
Alan could be capable of being interested in objects of any sort, sure.
Many booksellers.
It took me 10 or 20 years before I started looking at the walls of places where I was invited, so that I would risk buying a print or a painting or a piece of art.
Booksellers eventually learned to look at the walls or the floors, although their great pleasure is books, I think, without a doubt.
Which library and baron of Congress made their comments?
William Madison.
former chief of the Air Book Division, Library of Congress.
And where is he now?
He's retired in Baltimore.
He's one of Larry's old customers.
Larry is said to have a lot of personal relationships with a lot of customers, and I'm presumptuous to say that, you know, I think he has fewer rather than more.
He has this entire other life, of course, as a writer.
Bill Matheson's certainly one of them.
I've been told to contact him right away.
He's readily reachable.
And knowledgeable, I'm told.
Oh, and very knowledgeable and very fastidious.
Hallam was a classic example of the man out for, and very talented at doing it, out for an interesting item, which no matter what it cost, was susceptible to a substantial increase in price, and he undoubtedly did it many, many times.
There's a whole class of booksellers or book people who
can't do that.
And of course they need to have a sufficiently persuasive personality to persuade somebody to buy it.
But my guess is that they are not selling the things that they find over and over again to the same customers.
One of their more serious motivations is the immediate
Has Helen worked in the trunk of his car?
He indeed works in the trunk of his car.
Literally and figuratively and all-in-one he is.
I think he more or less is almost retired from doing things like this.
He's been involved in a lot of social work, I think.
And he lives in Washington?
Yes, he lives in the perimeter.
I have a subject.
He's worth my attention, in other words.
Yes, he is indeed worth your attention.
As a classic example of a self-made dealer, self-educated self-made dealer, I'm not sure what schooling he may have had, or he's a loner, a self-made man, and a self-motivator, and totally independent.
He's well known for having cash in his cowboy boots, and a lot of it.
I don't think he's a Texan, but he is an idiosyncratic and visible human being who would stand out amongst any group of buyers, a man of great confidence and a man of cash.
There aren't, in these modern days of corporate finance, and there are many young booksellers who are incorporated, including myself,
And bookkeepers and computers, he is completely different in that regard.
I'm going to change subjects.
I just want to make sure everything is awesome.
Larry, in a letter to me, said, after having written Cadillac Jack, what more is declining to discuss his experiences as a bookseller?
He doesn't want to talk about his experiences.
Well, his experiences are very complex.
And instead, let me just finish, he has sent me to other people.
Not necessarily, I mean, I don't have to be a rocket scientist to know what the drill is.
I mean, he suggested a few people that I talked to just to talk to.
You know what I'm saying?
I think you and I understand that's why we're starting with Larry McMurtry.
I think that he's suggesting, I'm not going to talk to you about myself, but there are a few people perhaps.
Who will.
Who will, and Marcia is one.
I mean, I didn't know about Marcia.
She's wonderful.
I had a pleasant day with her.
I never was.
I would drop in on Larry and he would have been there more frequently than now.
So how much of a bookseller he is and how much of his emotional life is satisfied by being a bookseller I think is qualitatively different from any other bookseller since he has an entirely other life.
That would be satisfactory for most people, but Larry was a bookseller at the beginning.
And before he was Larry McMurtry.
That's right, before he was a famous writer, or simply a writer whether famous or not, or successful or not.
And I think Larry enjoyed as much success as any writer might reasonably have a hope for from the very beginning.
It was only in the very end that he was qualitatively in the stratosphere in so many regards, particularly popularly.
But bookselling is very hard to shake.
And for Larry, the acquisition of books, it seems to me, clearly an enormous portion of the... provides the satisfaction...
for an enormous portion of his book life.
Do you think he's a dealer more than a seller?
No, he's a buyer.
He's a buyer.
He lets the books take care of themselves.
That's why he has Marsha and Ray and the others.
Well, I mean, he had a romantic relationship with Marsha, and their professional relationship has persevered.
The question is, how often is he in a store?
I sense that, by the way.
I didn't know that, but I sense that.
I'm sure that you might find pieces of Marsha.
read his books carefully enough looking for them.
It's a terrible mistake to do with any writer, just a terrible crime against the people.
I will keep this part off the record, by the way.
And the books.
But from my point of view, I'm interested in the degrees to which book people get satisfactions in their emotional lives in all aspects of
being a book dealer.
I often talk as if, you know, the way I feel about myself is the way everyone ought to be.
Do you understand that?
By the way, dealer?
I know Colin Franklin corrected me.
He said, I do not like to be called a book dealer.
I suppose I have to accept it because I'm a bookseller.
Fine.
So I've been very... I see no need to be...
petty or picky about the terminology.
I mean, it's a noble profession.
He used to be a banker, now he's a dealer.
And he deals at the extreme point of the trade in the most fastidious manner with the least dubious or challengeable types of material, and he's very happy in it.
And he deals in things that are terribly expensive, and he gets to think and feel and touch, you know, one million to one percent of what's out there.
And I get to handle, you know, probably 10,000 times as many items as he has, some of them with as much knowledge about them as he has about his items.
And so people are not to be compared in that way.
Actually... But then again they are, because it's fun.
Well, no, they're not, actually.
They ought not to be, and it's a terrible mistake.
I'm a very judgmental person.
But they won't put me on track, then.
Well, I was sitting next to him on the bus in the Japanese Tokyo Congress, and he was explaining to a Japanese bookseller that he had six or nine beehives, and that he did beekeeping,
that the honey garnered there from, which he extracted himself, was made pleasant gifts for his friends on an annual basis.
And I was reflecting how charming it is that a man should be able to spend time with his beehives, having just gone to the middle of Czechoslovakia and been with a scientist who was hosting us, from whom I bought a few books, who himself had a few beehives in his little garden cottage in the middle of nowhere.
I said, well, that makes Colin even more of an agreeable person.
Colin is an extremely agreeable person.
He just doesn't choose to have an opportunity to derive as much pleasure from as many books and as many customers as some other person.
We can make a transition.
Unless there's anything more to add to this?
No, it's just the habitual
focusing on the nether ends of the book trade, the person who, for whatever reason, chooses to deal on a few items from a remote spot at his time and place and leisure, compared with someone who has a shop in the middle of downtown and who is haunted by either structural problems or negotiating problems or financial problems and who is feverishly attempting to acquire all the books in the world and then feverishly trying to sell them to every person in the world and the pain
time maintaining personal life, raising children, and fixing his car.
So the nice thing about the book trade is that anyone in it or penetrating it can go to either end of it in an instant and be totally welcome, and even as you seem to have done, the book trade has this tremendous range and in a range of people, and it is one of the
few professions, I think, in which you can cross over at any time and be welcome, no matter who you are or how you look or what you do.
This is the audience, by the way.
This is the appeal of my book, as I hope to appeal to all of these.
Now, this fellow, Weber, you think he'll be at the Boston Fair?
No.
So I shouldn't be alert to his presence.
He could be.
I don't think he... I think he really has turned away into... He's got a conversion.
Literally a conversion.
It's conceived I wouldn't be surprised there.
He certainly would have been there a couple of years ago, but I think he's changed.
Well, I think people describe him.
There used to be a guy with a long ponytail.
Well, he's got a long ponytail hair and cowboy boots and a large belly, a very large belly.
He's a character, but he's not a fool.
He's not a fool.
He's a very, very curious man, and he's looking for things to be curious about.
And people like that turn up interesting things.
What they do with them and who they share their profits with is another matter, but they are constantly out there prowling.
And the country is well proud of the questions and the people who come up with amazing, interesting things are not always the ones who are most successfully, the greatest financial beneficiaries of their labors.
He happens to be the kind of person who insists upon the financial benefit of his labor.
There are some who do not, or who are unsuccessful at it,
And those are the saints of the book trade.
There are very few of them.
I've met two in my life, and they are, I habitually call them the greatest book scouts in the world.
And they are?
And in my terms and under my definitions of the range of activities and so on, they indeed are.
And who are they?
One is David Sachs in Oakland, California, and the other is Martin Stone of England, but now in Paris.
And they're saints?
They are saints.
And they are saints because?
They're saints because their primary motivation is not financial.
And the books that they find are the most interesting and wonderful in the world.
Immodesty aside, where would you place yourself in this wide spectrum that you have described for me, going from Hallam all the way up to Colin Franklin and some saints, either on the periphery?
Well, I'm a worshipper at the shrine.
And too, I'm a publicist.
Well, I will bleak the character of the people I admire, obviously, in order to stand in their light in some instances.
But I am also willing to go the extra step and keep the faith and make their products support them and support people like them and to get interested in things that they allow me to be interested in and extend the boundaries of, let's just say,
my customers' knowledge in order to, or make available to a larger number of people that which I learned from those who touched me.
One bookseller whom I quite like and who has certainly had a hard time of it, no, it was someone else, I can't remember, it'll come back to me, has said it was one of the few remarks that I actually had
to give me for all my life that I was the least curious bookseller or person you'd ever met.
And I took that to heart because I felt I understood where it was coming from and I believed it was true.
And so I'm not sure that I've changed any since that time.
I probably haven't.
I haven't let that bother me.
I've let it be a goad to
to be at least receptive to everything that comes across my path.
It almost really results in a tremendous superficiality, which I believe I make up for simply by dogged dumb and hard work.
I've come to build around me a bookstore and a set of relationships.
which will sustain me and from which I can represent the whole book trade.
So I operate in a place and in a mental place, which I believe is very large and receptive.
Are you, by the way, a person I should talk to if I'm trying to pitch a story as a preview or a review, one or the other, of the California Book Fair to a California newspaper?
who would I talk to?
For what purpose?
To get information.
About what?
The fair.
The one upcoming... What kind of information about the fair?
Well, we'll talk about that.
This doesn't have to be a take.
No, I mean, you know, I don't mind.
Well, I'm trying to... No, I'm just saying.
This is not for my book.
I'm trying to pitch a story.
I'm sorry.
My wife's father was a surgeon in Worcester and his father was a surgeon in Worcester and... What was his name?
Seely, S-E-E-L-Y-E, and his father founded Smith College, was the first president of Smith College.
It's a noble lineage that went from academic leadership to medicine.
I met with a young woman at Bates College who was related to Seely.
Well, there's a nest of Seelys out of Worcester, and I had the great good fortune to meet my
the Celia I married in the middle of Alaska.
Tell me a little bit, give me a little biographical background of yourself, unless there's a sketch someplace of you that I can draw.
Well, it's a standard story, and it's almost surely replicated by many, many booksellers these days, as opposed to old days.
I think Larry Whitten is, although he ended up in quite a different area in books, was quite similar to myself.
There are many people that went my route.
I was a high school student interested in literature, and I, for some reason, fell in with an old man who ran the Haverford Club in Philadelphia, in Baltimore.
I was an army brat, traveled as a child, and my mother moved 27 times by herself.
But I was in high school in Baltimore for four years, fell in with the gentleman who ran the Haverford Club, and so when it came
look for college, and I was, of course, going to be a professor of literature.
It was Harvard or Haverford, and I was, my brother had gone to Harvard, and so had my father, and I was much enamored of Haverford, and I went there, and I was extremely happy to have done so.
And I played cricket, and I studied literature and biblical literature, and enjoyed myself in ways that people seemed to have more difficulty doing in college.
It was a highly intellectually motivating place, and the context and one's peers were tremendously... I graduated there in 1960 amongst many gifted people.
I met my wife, who was from Swarthmore, on a Quaker work project.
And the Quaker values sifted down slightly, penetrated my defenses.
more than any other.
And then in graduate school, I was already programmed for graduate school from the beginning.
For some reason, I wrote an honors paper on D.H.
Lawrence as a senior, and for some reason I found it necessary to collect D.H.
Lawrence at that time, and I did so as best I could from the local environs.
And I also had
enjoyed buying books in order to begin to create a library so that all of us would buy from Blackwell's in those glorious days.
And then I simply moved to California to go to graduate school at Berkeley instead of Harvard.
The two choices, because my wife's family had moved west, and it seemed the obvious thing to do at that time.
And I continued to collect the H. Lawrence, which brought me into the touch of
Warren Howell and David McGee and Max Mahunley and John Swingle and Old Oregon Bookstore and Henry Wenning and Margie Cohen, all the major influences on my life in that sentence.
And I also, as a teacher of subject A for six years, there were amongst a few people, two in particular, who were also interested in building a graduate student's library.
And so the three of us, one way or another,
attempted to bring books into our homes, but I found that I obtained more pleasure getting books for them than for myself.
And then one day I found 50 volumes of the Early English Text Society, which the graduate student reading room needed at Berkeley, and I then sold that set to the university librarian at the time, who was a bitch.
and to complain about the fact that I had them rebound because they could have done it cheaper or something.
And from that moment on, I was a bookseller.
I got a license in 1960, resale number in 1963.
I remained from 1960 to 1968 in honorable enrollment as a graduate student, and then in 1968 I left
with all but the dissertation.
I'd been advanced to candidacy.
I'd filled all my language requirements, both Latin and German, and Old English to Middle English, everything but French, which I had never yet studied.
But I had a store in my last year as a graduate student.
In Berkeley.
When I bought the entire contents of a store blind at auction and put it in my home, my wife said it was time for me to make a decision.
A career decision.
And I did.
Serendipity was born in that?
Well, it was born in 1963, had a store in 68, $90 a month or so.
Was it serendipity?
It was serendipity from the beginning with a logo from the beginning, a logo that I had
It was an inkblot logo that was co-opted from the Bryn Mawr Haverford Review of 1958 or 9, and I've used it ever since, one way or another, on my catalog.
Did you determine a focus from the beginning, or were you...?
Oh, I was in modern literature, even though that was not subject to my study.
For the longest time, I was principally a student, a bookseller of modern literature.
It's always the most accessible.
group of books, and it's where many people start, particularly if they're uncapitalized.
It's an area, everyone who deals in modern books attracts, let's put it this way, those who deal in modern books are the most visible dealers in our country, and
And the people who are converted to book selling inevitably start by frequenting such stores and then they see someone buy a book for $100 and sell for $600 and instantly conclude that that's for them.
And they start collecting a given author and then they sell that author when they complete the collection.
And if they have some success at it, they're convinced that it's the profession for them because it's
They see the attractive side of the book business.
Are you a collector yourself?
I'm not a collector.
I'm fundamentally against dealers collecting, but it really is only a matter of words.
I'm very much against a dealer cheating on his customers.
That is to say, collecting against his customers.
collecting the very things that he ought to be selling to his customers.
And there are many dealers who do that.
That's the kiss of death when the customer knows that, too, by the way.
The customer knows the dealer is collecting.
Well, there are, of course, a myriad of exceptions immediately to be made, the first of which is, well, you can't deny the pleasure of collecting something that would be stupid.
Often dealers collect in peculiar little corners
which are not necessarily the territory of the customers they then have.
This will inevitably put them in touch with customers.
Many invest by collecting.
This is an element that dominates the book world or is riff on which one can go on indecently forever.
But the emotional life...
And then, of course, there's the wise dealer who collects ahead of the market and who is setting things aside for future sale.
The moment you challenge a dealer whom you know to be buying something for his personal collection and ask him when you buy these books from other people, they're not going to be for sale, right?
They're free, but yeah, that's correct.
These are my personal collection.
And it's a hackneyed remark when the dealer says, oh, this is for my personal collection.
You then ask him, well, when you have bought such things previously, have you refused your dealer discount and paid sales tax?
And inevitably the man says, well, of course I have to choose my dealer discount.
And the whole point of a dealer discount is that it will be for resale.
But many people collect strategically, waiting for Godot has systematically collected every, at all times, a single entity.
in addition to everything else they do, and then when that collection has been fulfilled in their needs, they'll sell it.
And all of us know dealers like that.
In fact, they then become retail customers, i.e., they're the first people one turns to with a given item.
I came here bearing an inscribed Borges for waiting for Godot, if they will pay me what I think I should get, because I know that they're building a serious Borges collection.
And I knew that and I'd sold them interesting Borges items before that.
And I would go out of my way.
I would go to the ends of the earth looking for Borges for them because I regard it as my sworn duty to do so.
It's my emotional duty.
It's a financial responsibility.
And being able to do it for another dealer rather than a private person is only right and proper and credit in heaven as well.
and as soon as you multiply this by all of the dealers in the world, all of whom have long-range collections as well as short-range collections, you are thought to be, you are recognized to be an attentive person.
It's clearly, among other things, a way in which you seek to be
thanked or appreciated.
It's an egregious way to garner stroking or thanks.
And I'm a total victim of this emotional need to be appreciated or admired.
I think it's almost surely one of my most obnoxious qualities.
Once, and I often think kindly of others who seem to be afflicted by the same needs, my two book scouts were, my two greatest book scouts in the world were totally dedicated to aggressively finding for people who, for anyone who was in need of anything, something related to what they needed that they couldn't possibly imagine to have existed.
which these people then, by their sheer genius, were able to find.
And when they do that, over and over and over again, you realize that they're contributing to your understanding of the world, not just the world of books.
They're simply spending all of the bounds of humanity's knowledge in all its multitudinous forms.
And they get an immense pleasure out of it, and it's not measured by money.
In fact, money is only a harmful problem to get over.
You mentioned earlier affection for your customers, and this came out in context with Larry.
We've talked about Larry, but talk to me about that as an element in what you do, the affection that you develop for the people
business with.
I think you've alluded to that.
I think of booksellers with premises.
Well, concomitant.
The satisfaction you get in helping an individual build a collection, so maybe you can work that in as well.
Well, people have various amounts of time for other people.
I have a large premises which enables me to have many relationships with many people, and some of them are up to projects.
They might not even be just people.
They may be institutions as well.
I get an immense pleasure from being able to supply either to an individual customer or an institution
something that they want or need or go to realize that they would like.
And at the same time, I make available a vast range of books in which people are free to discover on their own that they want them without my forcing them down their throat.
And I'm very adept at forcing books down people's throats.
That's not the way I would normally put it, and I don't mean it that way, but that can seem to be the effect on it.
And the degree to which people feel like they are eager to come back to me one way or another is the degree to which I am able to feel that I have a
relationship with that person, these are always relationships that are indirect and are made via the individual book or the collection or the sequence of acquisitions or sales that occur.
Consequently, the relationship
are uniformly indirect.
The direct relationships that book people have are possibly very much fewer than the emotional relationships that obtain in other lives, because the books are always between.
I have a friend, a wonderful friend with whom I am personally very close.
I have a few friends, very few friends,
close friends.
And he has described a bookseller as a person who solves problems caused by books.
And so he could care less about any individual book or the degree to which anybody wants it or the amount of money to be made from it
And I must say that I have gotten quite blasé about the individual book, although I am much more concerned than he about what happens to it and keeping a tentacle on it and being known for having had it and for wanting to have every important book syndrome you'll find in all modern literature
oh, I haven't had this book before, it must be scarce, now I have it, the need to have had experienced every memorable, serious book in modern literature, and indeed I feel I have experienced almost every book, or feel that I'm capable of it.
My friend could care less about such silly emotions.
But if there is a problem caused by books, he...
thinks the bookseller should solve it.
A problem such as?
The problem that somebody has inherited a 19th century Scottish architect's pile of drawings ten feet high that he is the unwitting heir to, and they're important drawings and they need to find their home.
And he walks in and says, what can you do for me?
And there's a problem.
Because these are the real stuff, and their value is not yet determined.
You may do it 50-50, you may do it 80-20, but it's not necessarily that you didn't choose it, it chose you.
And something has to be done, and it's not an experience that you've been programmed to deal with.
You're talking about definite problems, you're not talking about spiritual, intellectual problems.
No, we're talking chiefly about mechanical problems.
Somebody with an intellectual problem can get a copy of a book if he needs it.
No, I mean, what we're doing is making available, putting books in libraries, private and public and institutional, to let people solve their intellectual problems.
No, we're talking about emotional problems and structural problems and mechanical problems.
And there are a lot of lives deeply twisted and committed to books out there.
Far more.
I mean, I have never yet.
I have never in my life met a stamp dealer.
I don't think I've ever met a stamp dealer.
I've barely ever met a coin dealer.
Of course, we all meet print dealers, and they seem to be on the fringes of the book trade rather than
the book trade being on the fringes of the print trade.
Or the art trade for that.
And the art trade is another matter.
The art trade is different.
And it's different from the print trade, too.
Yes, I'm sure.
None of us have any respect for the print trade.
There are very few print dealers among us with any stature.
They do not command our respect.
They are chiefly regarded as people carve up books.
Well, like Grand Marader, he's only taken it to its logical conclusions.
It's just that we don't like the logical conclusions.
By involving corporations in the acquisition of better prints for their walls, he simply expanded the market and he can absorb any
He can go after the top end of prints and pay any price for them, because he'll simply charge more by carving them up, and he has a market that can pay more.
Tell me what you feel about people such as Mr. Arater.
Well, I mean, everybody feels the same about Arater.
Some would sell to him, some wouldn't, and I think he enjoys universal despite in our profession.
But he's also a hard-working, successful businessman.
I'm not sure who cares that that's true.
The odd phenomenon is that he may work harder than any of us, although I'm very reluctant to say that anybody works harder than I do.
Well, he's a successful businessman.
Yes, of course.
And he's a successful businessman.
He's not in our thoughts, is the fact.
And he makes it effectively impossible for very many kinds of dealers to deal in the kinds of books that he's carving up.
So that it's not relevant.
I'm going to turn this on the other side.
It's simply not relevant because the kinds of books that he monopolizes are not available to the rest of us.
And he, fortunately, is less interested in many of the books that the rest of us are interested in.
You know the book?
He and Bill Reese won the Yale Book Collecting Prize.
I think I did know that, actually.
It is interesting, isn't it?
There are quite different types of dealers, even though both entered the trade with considerable family assets.
There's no one more highly regarded than Bill Reese and no one more attentive to the needs of his colleagues than Bill Reese.
And there's no one who I think enjoys the attention and respect of the academic community into which he sells a great number of books than Bill Reese.
Oh, I know.
Bill Reese is simply a first-class book.
So there's a large number of people with serious scholarly attainments
who've run into the book business in the last 30 years, replacing, of course, there had been a tradition of academic excellence and scholarly research capacities in the book trade from the beginning, but these people are not commonly in the book business.
And he is certainly one of them.
As is... I'm going to stop.